feat: add post on realms vs kernels (#134)
gnolang/blog: posts/2025-05-12_kernel_realm/README.md

---
publication_date: 2025-05-12T13:17:22Z
slug: kernel and realm
tags: [kernel, process, realm]
authors: [mvertes]
---

# Gno realms vs system kernels

> Let's explore the analogy between Gno and operating systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What if every program on your computer could run forever, own its own memory, and decide exactly how others could interact with it - without relying on a central operating system? This is the core idea behind Gno, a decentralized virtual computer where realms replace traditional processes, and each one acts as its own secure kernel.

Let's explore the analogy between Gno realms and operating system kernels. By comparing how processes and permissions are handled in conventional OSes to how realms operate in Gno, you’ll see how Gno reimagines the foundations of computing; turning package developers into system architects and making the blockchain not just a ledger, but a platform for living software.
```

Reviewer: Added an effective intro, to entice people to start reading it.

In computers, the role of the operating system is to isolate each process from

> each other, for memory integrity and security, and to control access to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the others, for memory integrity and security, and to control access to
```

> system resources, including time sharing access to CPU. It also let processes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
system resources, including time sharing access to the CPU. It also lets processes
```

> to communicate with others, or externally through the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
communicate with others, or externally through the network.
```

The operating system provides those capabilities through the kernel, which

> execute system calls.  When invoked by a user process,  the kernel switches the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
executes system calls.  When invoked by a user process,  the kernel switches the
```

CPU into a priviledged mode, to perform the services outside user reach. Each
resource located outside of the process private user memory must be manipulated
through system calls, under the strict supervision of the kernel, which acts as
a neutral trusted facilitator between untrusted processes. On bare metal
systems, this is enforced by the hardware itself.

Gno is a distributed multi-user virtual computer implemented on top of the
blockchain, so that every operation occurs in a deterministic way. User program

> code and memory states are made temper proof by the use of merkle trees and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code and memory states are made tamper-proof by the use of merkle trees and
```

> consensus based verification, all provided by the underlying blockchain storage

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consensus-based verification, all provided by the underlying blockchain storage
```

layer, itself distributed.

In Gno, the equivalent of computer processes are *realms*. Each realm is like an

> always active process, running for ever, like for example a web server. In a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
always-active process, running forever, like for example a web server. In a
```

regular system, a live process is defined by its PID, its memory, and the set
of system resources it uses at a given time (files, connections, etc).
Similarly in Gno, a realm is defined by its identity (a unique crypto address),
its global memory state (the content of memory when the realm is at rest),

> which may contain for example the amount of coins it detains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which may contain for example the amount of coins it retains.
```

A realm may provide services to other realms through the exported public
functions it declares, and it may use services provided by other realms by

> importing another realm functions and directly calling the other realm function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
importing another realm's functions and directly calling the other realm function
```

> in its code. The way of declaring exported function, and importing them is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in its code. The way of declaring exported functions, and importing them is
```

> exactly identical to the way that packages are defined in the Go language. A

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
exactly identical to how packages are defined in the Go language. A
```

realm is a Gno process, but is a also a package (in the Go sense).

Functions in packages can be pure (in the functional programming sense: the
function has no side effect and operates only on temporary local variables
which are disgarded at return), or not: some variable outside of the function
scope is modified. In that case, the modified variable must be defined in the
same package as the function. Functions can only write global variables
declared inside their own package space (assuming variables are unexported),

> and it is always inforced, as in Go, by static code analysis.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and it is always enforced, as in Go, by static code analysis.
```

> same package as the function. Functions can only write global variables
> declared inside their own package space (assuming variables are unexported),
> and it is always enforced, as in Go, by static code analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
same package as the function. Functions can only write to global variables
declared within their own package space (assuming variables are unexported),
and static code analysis, as in Go, enforces this rule.
```

But because realms are also stateful processes with their own identity and

> protected space, and that a process can only write in its own space, calling a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
protected space, and because a process can write only in its own space, calling a
```

non-pure function imported from another realm means that the caller realm would
attempt to write in the callee realm space, which is forbidden!

To resolve this, the current realm identity is switched from the caller to the
callee until the function returns, like when crossing the user-kernel boundary
in a regular system call. From the system point of view, the current realm is
set to the callee, the previous realm to the caller. At function return, the
current realm and previous realm are restored to their original value.

So non-pure exported functions act exactly like a system call: they provide the
ability to write outside the calling realm space, by crossing the realm
boundary. A realm doesn't need to trust a caller realm: only itself can write in
its own space. A realm doesn`t need to trust an external kernel: it is its own

> kernel, it decides exactly how its data can be accessed and or modified by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kernel, it decides exactly how its data can be accessed and/or modified by
```

> the kernel, it decides exactly how its data can be accessed and/or modified by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kernel, it decides exactly how its data can be accessed and/or modified by
```

caller realms.

> Gno unifies the concepts of Go package and Unix process in a single simple

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gno unifies the concepts of Go packages and Unix processes in a single simple
```

concept: the realm. The kernel is decentralized and put back in control of
package developers. The operating system itself becomes transparent: realm
processes are both resource users and providers, with full control and
accountability.

> In Gno, programs are processes are packages are realms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Gno, programs are processes are packages are realms. Gno rethinks the traditional boundaries between processes, packages, and system calls. By making each realm self-contained and in control of its own state, it replaces the need for a central kernel with a decentralized model where programs define their own access rules. It’s a practical and minimal approach to building secure, composable software on-chain.
```

Reviewer: Added a closing summary, because the article abruptly closes.

executes system calls.  When invoked by a user process,  the kernel switches
the CPU into a privileged mode, to perform the services outside user reach.
Each resource located outside of the process means the private user memory must
be manipulated through system calls. This is done under the strict supervision
of the kernel, which acts as a neutral trusted facilitator between untrusted
processes. On bare metal systems, this is enforced by the hardware itself.

Gno is a distributed multi-user virtual computer implemented on top of the
blockchain, ensuring all operations execute deterministically. The distributed
storage layer of the blockchain provides Merkle trees and consensus-based
verification that makes program code and memory tamper-proof. 

In Gno, the equivalent of computer processes are *realms*. Each realm is like
an always-active process, running forever, similar to a web server. In a
regular system, a live process is defined by its Process Identifier (PID, a
number set by the system for the life of the process), its memory, and the set
of system resources it uses at a given time (files, connections, etc).

> Similarly in Gno, a realm is defined by its identity (a unique crypto address),

Reviewer 5: The address is secondary

```suggestion
Similarly in Gno, a realm is defined by its identity (a unique package path),
```

its global memory state (the content of memory when the realm is at rest),
which may contain for example the amount of coins it retains.

A realm may provide services to other realms through the exported public
functions it declares, and it may use services provided by other realms by
importing the realm using an `import`  statement, and directly calling its
functions in code. The way of declaring exported functions and importing them
is exactly identical to how packages are defined in the Go language. A realm is
a Gno process, but is also a package (in the Go sense).

Functions in packages can be pure (in the functional programming sense: the
function has no side effects and operates only on temporary local variables
which are discarded at return), or not: some variable outside of the function
scope is modified. In that case, the modified variable must be defined in the
same package as the function. Functions can only write to global variables
declared within their own package space (assuming variables are unexported),
and static code analysis, as in Go, enforces this rule.

> But because realms are also stateful processes with their own identity and
> protected space, and because a process can write only in its own space, calling

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, because realms are also stateful processes with their own identity and
protected space, and because a process can write only in its own space, calling
```

a non-pure function imported from another realm means that the caller realm
would attempt to write in the callee realm space, which is forbidden!

To resolve this, the current realm identity is switched from the caller to the
callee until the function returns, like when crossing the user-kernel boundary
in a regular system call. From the system's point of view, the current realm is
set to the callee, the previous realm to the caller. At function return, the
current realm and previous realm are restored to their original value.

So non-pure exported functions act exactly like a system call: they provide the
ability to write outside the calling realm space, by crossing the realm
boundary. A realm doesn't need to trust the calling realm: only itself can
write in its own space. A realm doesn't need to trust an external kernel: it is
its own kernel, it decides exactly how its data can be accessed and/or modified
by caller realms.

> Gno unifies the concepts of Go packages and Unix processes in a single simple

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Gno unifies the concepts of Go packages and Unix processes in a single, simple
```
